our satellite probes such as the Mariner
spacecraft which photographed Venus
mercury and Mars send back to earth
coded information about the planets and
the Sun satellites called imp told us
about violent eruptions of hot gases in
the sun's lower atmosphere
we learn about the planets the Sun and
other stars by studying their light and
other energy but light is only one small
segment of the radiation stretched out
along that wide energy band called the
electromagnetic spectrum we can think of
this energy as waves like electrical
ripples in gases of a song or any other
star electrons jump around inside the
atoms as they do they release energy at
the upper end of the electromagnetic
spectrum is energy of short wavelength
and very high frequency gamma rays
x-rays and ultraviolet rays next comes
the band of energy we can see with
violet light at the high energy end then
down through blue green yellow orange
and red at the low frequency end below
the red we can again no longer see the
energy but we feel the energy as heat
when we move into the infrared and it's
still lower frequencies and longer
wavelengths is the energy of radio waves
energy of the electromagnetic spectrum
is silent and so a space unless we
translate that energy into sound imagine
that we could hear the energy all along
the spectrum from high-energy gamma rays
to low energy radio waves and back again
something interesting happens to a
packet of energy of a certain frequency
when the source and that energy packets
speeds away from us or toward us this is
true of x-rays light radio waves and
sound waves when the source speeds
toward us is ways get bunched up we then
hear it at a higher frequency than it
actually has when the energy source
passes us and speeds away it's waves get
stretched out at such times we hear the
energy at a pitch lower than it actually
has
astronomers use this effect called the
Doppler shift to study how planets stars
and distant galaxies move through space
with special instruments such as radio
telescopes and space satellites they
detect energy along the entire
electromagnetic spectrum with optical
telescopes they study light from the Sun
and other stars but the Sun also sends
out radio waves we can change these
silent waves into sound and hear a flare
or a sunspot or other solar activity as
it begins quietly bills to a peak and
then fades have you ever heard the Sun
energy from the Sun drives storms in
Earth's atmosphere and sets up wild
electronic singing called whistlers a
lightning stroke sends radio waves
crashing out into Earth's magnetic field
the crash is made up of many frequencies
as they speed along the great loops of
the magnetic field the higher
frequencies travel faster than the lower
frequencies the sudden crash has been
stretched into a long electronic bushels
flares on the Sun caused gusts in the
solar wind they rattle Earth's magnetic
field and produce a cosmic symphony part
of it has been nicknamed the dawn chorus
along with whistlers in the dawn chorus
Earth's magnetosphere roars like a lion
and nobody quite knows why